#Not a Conclusion: Cloud Thinking

*Extracted from [Cloud History, Cloud Thinking](http://cloudindx.com/history/) by James Bridle*. Emphasis mine. 

To live in the world today is to live under, and within, a cloud. The planetary scale of the climate has finally been replicated in the planetary scale of our information systems, which encircle the globe. Both of these systems are, quite literally, out of control.

In the case of the weather, anthropogenic climate change is now irreversible, and is driving increasingly violent change, both within geophysical processes, and within societies. [Climate-driven wars and mass migrations](http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/ominous-story-of-syria-climate-refugees/) are already a reality, as are effects which can be experienced more immediately, such as [increased turbulence](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/11/cost-bumpy-flights-air-turbulence-global-warming-united-airlines) in the atmosphere.

And yet, despite the direst warnings and desperate urgings of scientists, we seem unable to respond to this crisis. Writing in the New York Times, the founder of the Global Weather Corporation, a corporation using advanced data processing to improve weather prediction, forecasts “[A New Dark Age](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/19/opinion/a-new-dark-age-looms.html)”, in which the exponential disruptions produced by climate change drastically reduce our ability to predict the future. We will lack the tools and the understanding to deal with emergent, chaotic conditions, and the times we live in will be considered the point at which we passed through “peak knowledge” about the planet we live on. In response, the author proposes massive technological investment in weather monitoring and prediction: more data, more processing, more computational knowledge of the world.

**Meanwhile, the empirical case for computational knowledge itself is failing.** In the pharmacological sciences, which have spent decades automating and datafying the long process of drug discovery, results have fallen precipitously, giving rise to a new conception of computational effects. Turning Moore’s Law, which states that processing power increases exponentially over time, on its head, [Eroom’s Law](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22378269) acknowledges that progress is being made ever more slowly and less effectively by the pure application of computation. **In the battle between surveillance agencies and transparency activists, the fight for the control of the raw data which supposedly produces actionable knowledge about the world results not in improved security, but in mass oppression and paranoia.** The accompanying corrosive culture of secrecy and revelation doubles down on computational knowledge to reinforce the idea that pure information is sufficient for calculating the state of the world, and thus acting meaningfully within it.

At the philosophical scale, the abundance of information and the plurality of worldviews now accessible to us through the internet is not producing a coherent consensus reality, but one riven by fundamentalist insistence on simplistic narratives, conspiracy theories, and post-factual politics. **We do not seem to be able to exist within the shifting grey zone revealed to us by our increasingly ubiquitous information technologies, and instead resort to desperate modification strategies, bombarding it from the air with images and opinions in order to disperse and clarify it.** It’s not working.

A deep sense of unease permeates the atmosphere. “Weather,” as the artist Roni Horn [has observed](http://www.blouinartinfo.com/news/story/25053/becoming-the-weather), “is the key paradox of our time. Weather that is nice is often weather that is wrong. The nice is occurring in the immediate and individual, and the wrong is occurring systemwide.” Crisis is the new normal.

The cloud, however, remains a model of the world, just not the one we have taken it to mean. The apparent growth of crisis is, in part, a consequence of our new, technologically-augmented ability to perceive the world as it actually is, beyond the mediating prism of our own cultural sensorium. The stories we have been telling ourselves don’t bear out. They’re weak all over. **The cloud reveals not the deep truth at the heart of the world, but its fundamental incoherence, its vast and omniferous unknowability.**

In place of computational thinking, we must respond with cloud thinking: an accounting of the world which reclaims the recognition and the agency of unknowing. Aetiology is a dead end. The cloud, our world, is cloudy: it remains diffuse and forever diffusing; it refuses coherence. From our global civilisation and cultural history arises a technology of unknowing; the task of our century is to accommodate ourselves with the incoherence it reveals.